Publish activity report for 2022 Q4, and update roadmap for the next quarter (#251)
scala/scala.epfl.ch: records/2022-Q4-activity-report.md

For Scala 2 and Scala 3.

We shipped a new major version of the Scala Debug Adapter in Metals that improves the debugging experience in Scala 2 and Scala 3. In this new version, we improved the debugging steps, we added support for conditional breakpoints, logpoints and more features. See a full list of features in the release notes of the Scala Debug Adapter [3.0.1](https://github.com/scalacenter/scala-debug-adapter/releases/tag/v3.0.1) and [3.0.3](https://github.com/scalacenter/scala-debug-adapter/releases/tag/v3.0.3).

### BSP defaults for Metals

An area of improvement we've identified with Metals and the usage of the Build
Server Protocol (BSP) in general is that it provides many ways to get started
with a Scala project. We'd like to minimize this and revisit the default choices
that Metals makes of using Bloop no matter the build tool. The aim is to make
the experience a newcomer has smoother, abstracting away things like Bloop and
BSP, while still allowing for a powerful user experience for advanced users.
We're still in the experiment and research stage for this which is leading to
creating various issues around the ecosystem. However, the discussion and main

> work can be tracked in [metals#4505](https://github.com/scalameta/metals/discussions/4505#discussioncomment-4571546).

Reviewer: Should we maybe also link to https://contributors.scala-lang.org/t/revisiting-the-default-build-server-for-metals-roadmap/6054?

Author: Done in fce926e36f94706c5bedd331b59ffca522fecc59

### sbt

For Scala 2 and Scala 3

The Maven coordinates of sbt plugins are invalid based on the Maven specifications, as described in [sbt#3410](https://github.com/sbt/sbt/issues/3410)). This is causing a number of issues:
- Maven cannot resolve sbt plugin artifacts.
- Other resolution tools, like Coursier, must implement some sbt-specific hack to resolve them.
- Some Maven proxies cannot check the validity of sbt plugins and they reject them.
- The number of downloads of sbt plugins are unavailable on [oss.sonatype.org](https://oss.sonatype.org/).
- [javadoc.io](https://javadoc.io/) cannot find the scaladoc of sbt plugins.
- And more

We implemented a solution that enables a smooth transition to valid Maven pattern of sbt plugins in [sbt#7096](https://github.com/sbt/sbt/pull/7096). This solution will be available in sbt 1.9.x, with bidirectional compatibility: sbt 1.9.x will publish the valid and legacy artifacts of sbt plugins, and will be able to resolve the valid or legacy artifacts of sbt plugins.

### Language Improvements

> For Scala 3.

Reviewer: I find it a bit odd that these are just floating here like this. Would it be better to maybe put them in the headers? Like instead of having this here in the headers put like (_For Scala 3_), or even put this as a subscript instead?

Author: I agree with your observation, but I am not sure which alternative solution would be better.

If you are interested, feel free to make some experiments.

#### Clause Interleaving

As a reminder, last quarter, [SIP-47 - Clause Interleaving](https://github.com/scala/improvement-proposals/blob/main/content/clause-interleaving.md) proposed by the Center, got accepted for implementation.
As described in the Q3 report, it provides a way to have type parameter bounds be dependent on value parameters.

During this quarter, work has continued on bringing this SIP into the compiler as an experimental feature.

> Particular attention has been ported to the [pull request](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/pull/14019) and commit messages, to make them as easy to read and understand as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Particular attention has been given to the [pull request](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/pull/14019) and commit messages, to make them as easy to read and understand as possible.
```

This way it will be usable as a guide when writing future SIP implementations.

> The code itself also follows this principle, bringing well documented precise changes that make the project more simple, not less.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code itself also follows this principle, bringing well documented precise changes that make the project simpler.
```

#### Case Classes that Can Evolve in a Binary-Compatible Way

Case classes are popular to achieve domain modeling. However, they
come with an important drawback: it is impossible to apply any evolution
(adding/removing fields on a case class) in a backward binary compatible way.
This forces library authors to manually re-implement the features of
case classes that they need (typically, structural equality) at the price of
more verbosity. Other solutions include tools generating code (e.g.
contraband), or experimental macro annotations (e.g. data-class, scalameta).

In Q4, we submitted a [proposal](https://github.com/scala/improvement-proposals/pull/50) that has been actively
discussed by the Committee. Ultimately, we decided to withdraw the proposal in favor of documenting a workaround
that supports our use case without changing the language.

### TASTy Manipulation Library (tasty-query)

For Scala 3.

tasty-query is a library to read semantic information from Scala 3 classpaths.

> It reads Scala .tasty files, Scala 2 pickles and Java .class files, and presents the semantic information they contain in a unified API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It reads Scala `.tasty` files, Scala 2 pickles and Java `.class` files, and presents the semantic information they contain in a unified API.
```

tasty-query will be an essential tool for any static analysis involving Scala code.

> In particular, it is the basis for TASTy-MiMa.

Reviewer: Can we link to TASTy-MiMa?

Reviewer: I see we have a section down below that links to it, but maybe we should still link to the project or just the section down below.

Author: done in fce926e36f94706c5bedd331b59ffca522fecc59

More information can be found [in the readme of tasty-query](https://github.com/scalacenter/tasty-query#readme).

In this quarter, we made significant progress on tasty-query, and released several in-progress versions, the latest being 0.5.5.

> tasty-query is already used in the Scala Debug Adapter to provide smart step-into filters for Scala 3 code, as well as in the in-progress TASTy-MiMa.

Reviewer: Can we link to the scala debug adapter?

Author: Done in fce926e36f94706c5bedd331b59ffca522fecc59

### TASTy-MiMa

For Scala 3.

TASTy-MiMa is a new, in-progress tool that checks TASTy-compatibility across library versions.

> It is similar to MiMa, which works at the binary compatibility level.

Reviewer: Let's link to MiMa here in case people aren't familiar with it.

Author: Done in fce926e36f94706c5bedd331b59ffca522fecc59

The project can be found at https://github.com/scalacenter/tasty-mima.
It is based on tasty-query.

We implemented most of the core analysis, including:

* Translate types and symbols across two different "contexts" (universes, or classpaths)
* Missing classes and members
* Incompatible changes of the kind of members
* Incompatible changes of the type of term members
* Incompatible changes in the visibility of members, as well as of openness of classes

The only core changes left to implement are class headers and type members.

After that, we will move on to implementing an sbt and/or Mill plugin to make it available to library maintainers.

## Education and Documentation

### Scala Website

For Scala 2 and Scala 3.

> The [scala-lang.org](https://scala-lang.org) homepage is an important destination for both Scala users and non-Scala users, it is the most visited page at 44K visitors per month (the overall site receives 240K per month). Our long term goal is to make the homepage the best destination for both newcomers and returning users to identify the current state of Scala: what it is, what you can do with it, and who is using it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [scala-lang.org](https://scala-lang.org) homepage is an important destination for both Scala users and non-Scala users, it is the most visited page at 44K visitors per month (the overall site receives 240K views per month). Our long term goal is to make the homepage the best destination for both newcomers and returning users to identify the current state of Scala: what it is, what you can do with it, and who is using it.
```

While we are working on a refreshed front page, we made a usability improvement which was to restore the "Scala versions" to the front page (PR [scala-lang#1435][scala-lang#1435]). This puts at the top of the page the current 3.x and 2.13.x versions and a link to all releases. Previously users would have to go to the "Install" quick link to see this information.

### Scala Documentation Website

For Scala 2 and Scala 3.

The goal of this project is to improve the experience developers have reading the [docs.scala-lang.org website][scala-docs]. We will provide a seamless experience where content users can choose to see content specialised for Scala 2 or Scala 3, or unified when applicable to both. We also want to reduce the number of steps it takes to see content, and offer clear paths to newcomers.

> During this quarter, we have continued to migrate to using language version tabs across the site. These tabs show content specialised to either version of the language, typically code, and possibly explanations also. The user's preference is remembered so that all tabs are sychronized across the site to show either Scala 2 or Scala 3 by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During this quarter, we have continued the migration to using language version tabs across the site. These tabs show content specialised to either version of the language, typically code, and possibly explanations also. The user's preference is remembered so that all tabs are sychronized across the site to show either Scala 2 or Scala 3 by default.
```

- [docs.scala-lang#2630][docs.scala-lang#2630] and [docs.scala-lang#2631][docs.scala-lang#2631] to enhance the implicit conversions chapter of the Tour of Scala;
- [docs.scala-lang#2597][docs.scala-lang#2597], where we added version tabs to the [Migration Tutorial](https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/guides/migration/tutorial-intro.html);
- [docs.scala-lang#2598][docs.scala-lang#2598], [docs.scala-lang#2599][docs.scala-lang#2599], [docs.scala-lang#2602][docs.scala-lang#2602], [docs.scala-lang#2614][docs.scala-lang#2614], and [docs.scala-lang#2617][docs.scala-lang#2617] for updating various chapters of the Scala 3 book.

In addition, we have also made some improvements to usability of the site:
- [docs.scala-lang#2639][docs.scala-lang#2639] to fix the language dropdown of getting-started guide on translated pages.
- [docs.scala-lang#2637][docs.scala-lang#2637] to ensure all translations have the same layout for the landing page.
- [docs.scala-lang#2634][docs.scala-lang#2637] make the "outdated page" notice sticky so that the link to redirect to the updated page is always visible.

### Scala Toolkit

For Scala 2 and Scala 3.

> The goal of this project is to help the beginner-to-intermediate-level programmers to learn and use Scala in small projects, such as a script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this project is to help beginner-to-intermediate-level programmers to learn and use Scala in small projects, such as scripts.
```

To this end, we will publish a series of written tutorials that focus on common programming tasks, such as testing, reading and writing files, sending HTTP requests, etc.

We started writing a few tutorials for unit-testing using the MUnit library, in [scalacenter/docs.scala-lang#7096](https://github.com/sbt/sbt/pull/7096). The Scala Toolkit series will be published later this year.

### An integrated Scala.js ecosystem

For Scala 2 and Scala 3.

The Scala.js ecosystem contains individual pieces of great quality, from the compiler to the UI libraries. However, it is a challenge for every newcomer to find the pieces that are relevant, to connect them, and to build a good development experience. To address this issue, we want to provide a clear “integrated Scala.js ecosystem”. You can find the complete roadmap [here](https://contributors.scala-lang.org/t/the-scala-centers-roadmap-for-a-unified-scala-js-ecosystem/5568).

The second video in the series, [Getting Started with Scala.js, Laminar and ScalablyTyped](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hWUAVrNj65c) was published in December 2022.

> We gave talks on the same topic at Scala IO and ScalaCon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We gave talks on the same topic at ScalaIO and ScalaCon.
```

Reviewer: Can we link to the talks if they are online?

Author: The ScalaCon one is on YouTube, I’ve added a link in 710de3c

We prepared a written tutorial version of the above, which is currently an open pull request ([scala-js-website#590](https://github.com/scala-js/scala-js-website/pull/590)).

### Extension School

For Scala 3.

> Our partnership with the [Extension School](https://extensionschool.ch/learn/effective-programming-in-scala) allows us to provide more support to people learning Scala online. We have been answering the questions of the learners, and providing feedback to their homeworks. In addition, we have added subtitles to all our video lectures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our partnership with the [Extension School](https://extensionschool.ch/learn/effective-programming-in-scala) allows us to provide more support to people learning Scala online. We have been answering the questions of the learners, and providing feedback on their homework. In addition, we have added subtitles to all our video lectures.
```

## Communication

### Let’s Talk About Scala 3 Videos

For Scala 3.

> We produced a video about debugging Scala 3 in Metals. This video demonstrates the power of the debugger in a multi-threaded Scala 3 application. We show how to use the debugging steps, the debug console, the watches, and the different types of breakpoints. The video will soon be released on the Youtube platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We produced a video about debugging Scala 3 in Metals. This video demonstrates the power of the debugger in a multi-threaded Scala 3 application. We show how to use the debugging steps, the debug console, the watches, and the different types of breakpoints. The video will soon be released on the Youtube.
```

Platform here is redundant.

Author: Should we just say “on YouTube” instead of “on _the_ YouTube”?

Reviewer: Ah yes, good catch: `on YouTube`. 👍🏼

Author: Done in fce926e36f94706c5bedd331b59ffca522fecc59

## Community, Sustainability, and Governance

### Compiler Academy

For Scala 3.

Scala 3 Compiler Academy is an effort to provide community enthusiasts with a well-defined way to get started contributing to the Scala 3 compiler. We've been incubating it since Summer 2021. The online pair programming sessions at first took place only between the core team members. Throughout 2022, we were welcoming more and more external contributors to participate, but the project was still not open to the public.

In Q4, we're finally opening it to the wider public. We've integrated the project with Scala's official Discord so that everyone present there who is interested in contributing to the compiler will be aware of it and will be able to join.

The significance of the project is to ensure the long-term sustainability of Scala 3. Scala 3's team is smaller than corresponding teams of many other programming languages. We need to ensure that the project is not dependent on a small number of people, but rather on a large number of people who are interested in contributing to the compiler. Compiler Academy is one of the avenues that ensure a stream of new compiler enthusiasts.

> You can learn more about the Academy [here](https://compileracademy.carrd.co/). And [here](https://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2022/11/02/compiler-academy.html) is the blog post announcing opening it up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn more about the Academy [here](https://compileracademy.carrd.co/). [Here](https://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2022/11/02/compiler-academy.html) is the blog post announcing opening it up.
```

### Community Expansion

For Scala 2 and 3.

Scala is developed at EPFL, the Polytechnic University of Lausanne, Switzerland. Despite being around for close to 20 years, Scala is still not widely used in the scientific community.

To spark the interest of EPFL scientists and students in Scala, throughout 2022, we developed a workshop that introduces Scala to scientists in a gamified way. The workshop is about programming spacecrafts' trajectories in a game called [Simple Rockets 2](https://www.simplerockets.com/).

In Q4, we finalized this project by conducting the first workshop for the EPFL community. We had around 10 participants, and the workshop was a success. We're tentatively planning to conduct one such workshop per semester to spread awareness about Scala at EPFL and gain more userbase at our home university.

- [EPFL Announcement](https://memento.epfl.ch/event/launching-rockets-with-scala/)
- [Technical blog](https://akmetiuk.com/posts/2022-02-19-launching-rockets.html) to get an idea of what it is all about.

### Google Summer of Code

For Scala 2 and 3.

> Google Summer of Code is another initiative by the Scala Center to give Scala users a way to contribute to OSS. Most of the work on the project was done in Q2-Q3 2022, but there was still some work left to be done. in Q4, all the work was finalized, all of the students graduated successfully, and the project is officially over – for this year. You can read more about how it was and the projects we welcomed in the [blog article](https://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2022/11/15/gsoc-report.html) we published.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Google Summer of Code is another initiative by the Scala Center to give Scala users a way to contribute to OSS. Most of the work on the project was done in Q2-Q3 2022, but there was still some work left to be done in Q4, all the work was finalized, all of the students graduated successfully, and the project is officially over – for this year. You can read more about how it was and the projects we welcomed in the [blog article](https://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2022/11/15/gsoc-report.html) we published.
```

Author: Fixed in fce926e36f94706c5bedd331b59ffca522fecc59

We had around 20 people on both events.

### Scala Center's Marketing Materials

For Scala 2 and Scala 3.

Scala Center is a non-profit organisation. A large chunk of its budget comes from the Advisory Board membership fees – which are essentially an investment of the Scala industrial users into the future of the language. We are constantly on the lookout for new partners to join the Advisory Board.

It is not possible to effectively engage the potential partners if we don't have a clear and concise presentation of who we are, what we do and how the partnership with us is a win-win situation for everyone involved. In Q4, we developed a 5-pager PDF that achieves exactly that purpose. Aimed at developers, development team leaders and top-level managers alike, we expect it to give all those target audiences a clear understanding of Scala Center's mission without taking much of their time.

> At the time of writing this document, the PDF is still in production, but we hope to have it early January 2023.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of writing this document, the PDF is still being worked on, but we hope to have it early January 2023.
```

In Q4, we brought the project closer to maturity for Scala 3. The current status of the project is that all the functionality is implemented, but there are corner cases to work through. Addressing these corner cases will be the main objective of further work on the project, and once it is done, we'll be able to release it.

### Scala.js

For Scala 2 and 3.

We published Scala.js version [1.12.0](https://www.scala-js.org/news/2022/11/23/announcing-scalajs-1.12.0/).
The most important changes in these releases are:

* Support for the ECMAScript 2016 operator `**`
* Better error messages for `ArrayStoreExceptions`s and `NegativeArraySizeException`s.

We also updated Scala.js for the new Scala release 2.13.10.

In addition, we finalized and merged support for better error messages for `NullPointerException`s.
Those will be part of the next release.

### Scastie

For Scala 2 and 3.

> The [Scastie](https://scastie.scala-lang.org) code editor is a popular playground used daily by around 1000 people, despite providing basic editor setup. Its simplicity allows users to quickly try libraries or code snippets, and then share them with other people, or just quickly jump into starting coding with Scala for a newcomer. Our goal is to improve the experience by adding "IDE" features straight to the Scastie application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Scastie](https://scastie.scala-lang.org) code editor is a popular playground used daily by around 1000 people, despite providing basic editor setup. Its simplicity allows users to quickly try libraries or code snippets, and then share them with other people, or just quickly jump into starting coding with Scala for a newcomer. Our goal is to improve the experience by adding "IDE" features straight into the Scastie application.
```
